author:: Condé Nast
source:: [Will A.I. Become the New McKinsey?](https://www.newyorker.com/science/annals-of-artificial-intelligence/will-ai-become-the-new-mckinsey?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email)
clipped:: [[2023-05-10]]
published:: 

#clippings

Imagine an idealized future, a hundred years from now, in which no one is forced to work at any job they dislike, and everyone can spend their time on whatever they find most personally fulfilling. Obviously it’s hard to see how we’d get there from here. But now consider two possible scenarios for the next few decades. In one, management and the forces of capital are even more powerful than they are now. In the other, labor is more powerful than it is now. Which one of these seems more likely to get us closer to that idealized future? And, as it’s currently deployed, which one is A.I. pushing us toward?

Of course, there is the argument that new technology improves our standard of living in the long term, which makes up for the unemployment that it creates in the short term. This argument carried weight for much of the post-Industrial Revolution period, but it has lost its force in the past half century. In the United States, per-capita G.D.P. has almost doubled since 1980, while the median household income has lagged far behind. That period covers the information-technology revolution. This means that the economic value created by the personal computer and the Internet has mostly served to increase the wealth of the top one per cent of the top one per cent, instead of raising the standard of living for U.S. citizens as a whole.

Of course, we all have the Internet now, and the Internet is amazing. But real-estate prices, college tuition, and health-care costs have all risen faster than inflation. In 1980, it was common to support a family on a single income; now it’s rare. So, how much progress have we really made in the past forty years? Sure, shopping online is fast and easy, and streaming movies at home is cool, but I think a lot of people would willingly trade those conveniences for the ability to own their own homes, send their kids to college without running up lifelong debt, and go to the hospital without falling into bankruptcy. It’s not technology’s fault that the median income hasn’t kept pace with per-capita G.D.P.; it’s mostly the fault of Ronald Reagan and Milton Friedman. But some responsibility also falls on the management policies of C.E.O.s like [Jack Welch](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2022/11/07/was-jack-welch-the-greatest-ceo-of-his-day-or-the-worst), who ran General Electric between 1981 and 2001, as well as on consulting firms like McKinsey. I’m not blaming the personal computer for the rise in wealth inequality—I’m just saying that the claim that better technology will necessarily improve people’s standard of living is no longer credible.

The fact that personal computers didn’t raise the median income is particularly relevant when thinking about the possible benefits of A.I. It’s often suggested that researchers should focus on ways that A.I. can increase individual workers’ productivity rather than replace them; this is referred to as the augmentation path, as opposed to the automation path. That’s a worthy goal, but, by itself, it won’t improve people’s economic fortunes. The productivity software that ran on personal computers was a perfect example of augmentation rather than automation: word-processing programs replaced typewriters rather than typists, and spreadsheet programs replaced paper spreadsheets rather than accountants. But the increased personal productivity brought about by the personal computer wasn’t matched by an increased standard of living.

The only way that technology can boost the standard of living is if there are economic policies in place to distribute the benefits of technology appropriately. We haven’t had those policies for the past forty years, and, unless we get them, there is no reason to think that forthcoming advances in A.I. will raise the median income, even if we’re able to devise ways for it to augment individual workers. A.I. will certainly reduce labor costs and increase profits for corporations, but that is entirely different from improving our standard of living.

It would be convenient if we could assume that a utopian future is right around the corner and develop technology for use in that future. But the fact that a given technology would be helpful in a utopia does not imply that it’s helpful now. In a utopia where there’s a machine that converts toxic waste into food, generating toxic waste wouldn’t be a problem, but, in the here and now, no one could claim that generating toxic waste is harmless. Accelerationists might argue that generating more toxic waste will motivate the invention of a waste-to-food converter, but how convincing is that? We evaluate the environmental impact of technologies in the context of the mitigations that are currently available, not in the context of hypothetical future mitigations. By the same token, we can’t evaluate A.I. by imagining how helpful it will be in a world with U.B.I.; we have to evaluate it in light of the existing imbalance between capital and labor, and, in that context, A.I. is a threat because of the way it assists capital.

A former partner at McKinsey defended the company’s actions by saying, “We don’t do policy. We do execution.” But this is a pretty thin excuse; harmful policy decisions are more likely to be made when consulting firms—or new technologies—offer ways to implement them. The version of A.I. that’s currently being developed makes it easier for companies to lay people off. So is there any way to develop a kind of A.I. that makes it harder?

In his book “[How to Be an Anticapitalist in the 21st Century](https://www.amazon.com/How-Be-Anticapitalist-Twenty-First-Century/dp/1788736052),” the sociologist Erik Olin Wright offers a taxonomy of strategies for responding to the harms of capitalism. Two of the strategies he mentions are smashing capitalism and dismantling capitalism, which probably fall outside the scope of this discussion. The ones that are more relevant here are taming capitalism and resisting capitalism. Roughly speaking, taming capitalism means government regulation, and resisting capitalism means grassroots activism and labor unions. Are there ways for A.I. to strengthen those things? Is there a way for A.I. to empower labor unions or worker-owned coöperatives?